2-introduction.md, before:

# Introduction

*instructions: gives context in relation to chapter; short description of
individual protocols in unit; a brief mention of any critical limitations and
assumptions;*

The activity and function of a protein is tightly regulated by its cellular environment. To interact with their surroundings, proteins use various types of binding modules that each display distinct binding properties (PMID:10550212). One prominent type of binding module consists of short linear motifs (SLiMs) (PMID:18508681). These compact binding sites mediate a diverse set of interactions that regulate protein functionality (PMID:24926813, PMID:24773235) (Figure 1). They can function as ligand binding sites or as sites for post-translational modification (PTM). Some ligand SLiMs are recognised by components of the cellular transport machinery and function as localisation signals that target proteins to specific sub-cellular compartments. Other ligand SLiMs are abundantly present in interfaces that mediate the assembly of large macromolecular complexes and in highly modular scaffold proteins that act as multivalent platforms for protein complex assembly. Docking motifs are ligand SLiMs that recruit modification enzymes to their substrates by binding to a site on the enzyme that is distinct from the active site. A subset of these, known as degrons, recruit ubiquitin ligases, which subsequently polyubiquitylate their substrates and hence target them for proteasomal degradation. SLiMs that act as sites for PTM can either be targeted by specific enzymes for the addition or removal of a small chemical group, mediate proteolytic cleavage by acting as target site for proteolytic enzymes, or be recognised for structural modification by isomerases that catalyse cis-trans isomerisation of the peptide backbone.

SLiMs are generally located in intrinsically disordered regions (IDR) of the proteome, but often adapt a secondary structure upon binding (PMID:19841628). In general, they bind to the surface of a globular domain in a protein, although some are known to bind to a protein’s IDR or even RNA molecules. As their name suggests, SLiMs are compact, being composed of a limited number of adjacent amino acids. Most of a motif’s binding specificity however is conferred by only a subset of these amino acids. Those few residues that directly interact with the binding partner are evolutionary conserved, although in many cases a subset of amino acids that share certain properties (such as similar charge, size or hydrophobicity) are allowed in these hotspot positions. In the motif positions that contribute little to the interaction, there are even less constraints, i.e. a broader range of amino acids is allowed in these positions (PMID:21909575). A first consequence of this degeneracy is that SLiMs co-operatively engage in interactions of relatively low affinity. Hence these binding events are transient and reversible, and can be readily modulated, for instance by PTM. These characteristics make SLiM-based interactions ideal mediators of the dynamic processes involved in cell signalling (PMID:22480932). Another consequence is that it might take only a few or even a single point mutation to generate or disrupt a functional motif in a protein. The associated ability to evolve convergently might underlie the proliferation of SLiMs and the rewiring of interactomes (PMID:26589632) (PMID:22346764). Conversely, several SLiM-associated diseases have been characterised to date, for instance Liddle syndrome (PMID:15483078).

Due to their degenerate nature, motif sequences contain only very little information, and many short sequences in a proteome will match motif patterns. However, most of these matches will not represent functional motifs, and hence, when scanning a proteome for putative motifs using only the motif sequence patterns will yield a large number of false positive instances, far exceeding the number of true motifs. Therefore, reliable motif detection cannot go without experimental validation of candidate motifs, using different types of experiments and techniques (PMID:26581338). This however does not mean that bioinformatics analysis cannot guide researchers towards a subset of candidate motifs that have a higher probability to be functional and help rule out those candidate motifs that are likely to be false positives. Taking into account additional information, besides a match to a sequence pattern defining a SLiM, can greatly narrow the selection of putative motifs for experimental validation. Additional data for in silico analysis include conservation of the motif sequence, the location of the motif within the protein’s structure and its accessibility for its binding partner, validated interaction with the binding partner, and in-cell co-localisation with the binding partner. The availability and usefulness of these additional data for SLiM discovery depends on their extensive and correct biocuration. A vast and increasing amount of biological data is available in a wide variety of sources, including the literature and large-scale datasets. In order to facilitate integration of data, they need to be collected, annotated and formatted in central data and knowledge repositories. The ELM database provides such a repository for experimentally validated linear motif classes and instances. The ELM prediction tool in turn relies on annotated data, both from the ELM database and other resources, to accurately analyse unknown sequences for candidate motifs and assist researchers in selecting the most plausible ones for experimental validation and discard likely false positive hits, saving them valuable time and assets (PMID:22110040).

Commit message:

rename figure 1 to functional_classification_of_SLiMs.png

2-introduction.md, after:

# Introduction

*instructions: gives context in relation to chapter; short description of
individual protocols in unit; a brief mention of any critical limitations and
assumptions;*

The activity and function of a protein is tightly regulated by its cellular environment. To interact with their surroundings, proteins use various types of binding modules that each display distinct binding properties (PMID:10550212). One prominent type of binding module consists of short linear motifs (SLiMs) (PMID:18508681). These compact binding sites mediate a diverse set of interactions that regulate protein functionality (PMID:24926813, PMID:24773235) (Figure functional_classification_of_SLiMs). They can function as ligand binding sites or as sites for post-translational modification (PTM). Some ligand SLiMs are recognised by components of the cellular transport machinery and function as localisation signals that target proteins to specific sub-cellular compartments. Other ligand SLiMs are abundantly present in interfaces that mediate the assembly of large macromolecular complexes and in highly modular scaffold proteins that act as multivalent platforms for protein complex assembly. Docking motifs are ligand SLiMs that recruit modification enzymes to their substrates by binding to a site on the enzyme that is distinct from the active site. A subset of these, known as degrons, recruit ubiquitin ligases, which subsequently polyubiquitylate their substrates and hence target them for proteasomal degradation. SLiMs that act as sites for PTM can either be targeted by specific enzymes for the addition or removal of a small chemical group, mediate proteolytic cleavage by acting as target site for proteolytic enzymes, or be recognised for structural modification by isomerases that catalyse cis-trans isomerisation of the peptide backbone.

SLiMs are generally located in intrinsically disordered regions (IDR) of the proteome, but often adapt a secondary structure upon binding (PMID:19841628). In general, they bind to the surface of a globular domain in a protein, although some are known to bind to a protein’s IDR or even RNA molecules. As their name suggests, SLiMs are compact, being composed of a limited number of adjacent amino acids. Most of a motif’s binding specificity however is conferred by only a subset of these amino acids. Those few residues that directly interact with the binding partner are evolutionary conserved, although in many cases a subset of amino acids that share certain properties (such as similar charge, size or hydrophobicity) are allowed in these hotspot positions. In the motif positions that contribute little to the interaction, there are even less constraints, i.e. a broader range of amino acids is allowed in these positions (PMID:21909575). A first consequence of this degeneracy is that SLiMs co-operatively engage in interactions of relatively low affinity. Hence these binding events are transient and reversible, and can be readily modulated, for instance by PTM. These characteristics make SLiM-based interactions ideal mediators of the dynamic processes involved in cell signalling (PMID:22480932). Another consequence is that it might take only a few or even a single point mutation to generate or disrupt a functional motif in a protein. The associated ability to evolve convergently might underlie the proliferation of SLiMs and the rewiring of interactomes (PMID:26589632) (PMID:22346764). Conversely, several SLiM-associated diseases have been characterised to date, for instance Liddle syndrome (PMID:15483078).

Due to their degenerate nature, motif sequences contain only very little information, and many short sequences in a proteome will match motif patterns. However, most of these matches will not represent functional motifs, and hence, when scanning a proteome for putative motifs using only the motif sequence patterns will yield a large number of false positive instances, far exceeding the number of true motifs. Therefore, reliable motif detection cannot go without experimental validation of candidate motifs, using different types of experiments and techniques (PMID:26581338). This however does not mean that bioinformatics analysis cannot guide researchers towards a subset of candidate motifs that have a higher probability to be functional and help rule out those candidate motifs that are likely to be false positives. Taking into account additional information, besides a match to a sequence pattern defining a SLiM, can greatly narrow the selection of putative motifs for experimental validation. Additional data for in silico analysis include conservation of the motif sequence, the location of the motif within the protein’s structure and its accessibility for its binding partner, validated interaction with the binding partner, and in-cell co-localisation with the binding partner. The availability and usefulness of these additional data for SLiM discovery depends on their extensive and correct biocuration. A vast and increasing amount of biological data is available in a wide variety of sources, including the literature and large-scale datasets. In order to facilitate integration of data, they need to be collected, annotated and formatted in central data and knowledge repositories. The ELM database provides such a repository for experimentally validated linear motif classes and instances. The ELM prediction tool in turn relies on annotated data, both from the ELM database and other resources, to accurately analyse unknown sequences for candidate motifs and assist researchers in selecting the most plausible ones for experimental validation and discard likely false positive hits, saving them valuable time and assets (PMID:22110040).


![](Figures/functional_classification_of_SLiMs.png)
**Figure functional_classification_of_SLiMs** For each ELM class, the functional category to which it belongs is indicated by a three-letter prefix. Each ELM class is defined by a regular expression. Peptide sequences in proteins that match the regular expression of a specific ELM class and that were experimentally validated to be functional motifs are captured as ELM instances of that class. Degrons are a specific subtype of enzyme-recruiting docking motifs (see text for a detailed description).
