4-P53_basic_protocol_2.md, before:

# Basic Protocol 2: Predicting ELMs in sequences

One of the most useful (and used) features in ELM is the ability to detect
motifs in proteins and sequences. Given a protein's amino acid sequence, the
"EML Predictions" pipeline searches for occurrences of each motif class using
regular expressions, apply a set of filters to help judging results, and to
visualize resulting set of putative motifs.

In this protocol we will be viewing the manually annotated data of a typical
protein, using p53 (Uniprot ID: P53_HUMAN/P04637) as an example. We will cover
how to find the manually annotated motifs and instances, and how to find the
motif instances, the references used to annotate each instance, the
experimental protocols used, and additional information including relationships
to biological pathways (such as KEGG PMID:26476454), diseases (from OMIM
PMID:17357067) and molecular switches (in switches.ELM PMID:23550212).

## Necessary Resources

### Software & Hardware

A modern browser such as Firefox, Chrome, or Safari.
ELM is best viewed on a laptop or desktop computer, although tablets and
smartphones will also work.

## Predicting ELM instances using data from ELM database

![](Figures/TP53_1/elm_search.png)
**Figure TP53-BP1-1** The query input page for ELM for predicting motifs in a given protein sequence.

Step 1. Open a browser, and navigate to the ELM homepage: http://elm.eu.org.
Enter the Uniprot ID "P53_HUMAN" in the search field labelled "Enter a uniprot
identifier or accession number". The page should autocomplete/suggest the
protein "P53_HUMAN / P04637 (Homo sapiens)". Click on this entry to confirm
that we want to search for SLiM data for this protein. Click on "Submit" to
view the motif instance data for p53. (Fig. TP53-BP1-1)

> The autocompletion mechanism queries uniprot.org for protein identifier; if
> it succeeds, then additional information from uniprot will be used to
> pre-populate the filter boxes. In this example, P53_HUMAN is recognized as a
> Human protein, and so "Homo sapiens" is automatically filled in the
> "Taxonomic Context" field. Also, P53 has been annotated (by Uniprot) to be
> localized to nucleus, cytosol, endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondrion, so
> these are also automatically applied as search criteria. The motif cutoff of
> "100" is a sufficiently high (lenient) threshold to allow all other detected
> motifs to be shown.

step 3. Select the search criteria (optional). It is possible to limit the
   results by "cell compartment", "taxonomic context" or by changing the "motif
   probability cutoff". To restrict the search to include SLiM's that are
   active in certain cellular compartments, select one or more from the list
   (use the "control" key to select more than one option). It is also possible
   to select a "taxonomic context" to restrict the search to SLiMs from certain
   species. Start typing a species name in the "taxonomic context" input field to
   get an auto-completed list of species to select from.
   Additionaly, a "Motif probability cutoff" can be used to only retain ELM
   classes whose pattern probability is below the given value.
   For the current protocol, leave all of these at their default values: "not
   specified", "100" and no "taxonomic context"

TODO: Repeat search using stringent filters (homo sapiens, nucleus, 0.01)

## Interpreting the prediction results: Graphical Summary

step 4. Click "submit" to start the searching for motifs. 
   You will be brought to an intermediate page indicating that your results are
   being processed, and you should be redirected to the final results page within
   a minute.

> The Results are summarized in the first figure on the results page (see
> figure TP53-BP1-2). The graphical summary shows the results generated by the
> ELM prediction pipeline, combined with additional filters and information
> from external resources. The visualization should help you interpreting the
> results and to assess whether or not a motif is present in a sequence, as
> well as how likely it is to be functional based on its structural context and
> evolutionary conservation. Motif instances which are manually annotated in
> the database appear as red (TP) or yellow (FP) ovals in the graphic.
> Blue/gray squares represent predicted motif occurrences.
>
> You can bookmark this page: The results are stored for a week.

![](Figures/TP53_1/elm_results_summary.png)
TODO: INSERT/CHANGE FIGURE/NAME

**Figure TP53-BP1-2** The graphical results summary of the ELM Prediction
pipeline for “P53_HUMAN”. Note that not all motif detections are shown (the
image is truncated at the bottom). The top five rows show a set of structural
features. Annotated and predicted motifs are shown as differently colored
ovals/boxes.


step 6. The first row contains phosphorylation sites as retrieved from
   Phospho.ELM (PMID:21062810), and whether the phosphorylated amino acid is a
   serine, threonine or tyrosine. Phospho.ELM is a database of manually annotated
   phosphorylation sites obtained from scientific publications from low and
   high-throughput experiments. You can follow the link to Phospho.ELM by clicking
   on the phosphorylation site in the image to get more information on individual
   phosphorylation sites.

> Phosphorylation sites are only available when the search is performed with a
> protein accession (eg. *not* with FASTA sequence alone) in step XXX.
> Phosphorylation sites are relevant to interpret ELM motif predictions when
> the predicted motif requires to be phosphorylated (as in several docking and
> ligand binding motifs) and naturally, for the prediction of phosphorylation
> motifs.

step 7. The second row shows SMART and Pfam domains detected by the SMART
   database (PMID:9600884,PMID:25300481, PMID:9600884). Hover the mouse over
   these domains to see their names and exact start and end positions.

> In order to be functional SLiMs need to be accessble, and therefore they are
> usually not found within globular domains and structured regions
> (PMID:21909575). Any SLiMs detected by the ELM prediction pipeline are less
> likely to be functional, and are indicated with a red background (see also the "structural filter" described in step XXX).

step 8.  The third row shows globular and disordered regions in the sequence as
   predicted by GlobPlot (PMID:12824398). The fourth and fifth row contains
   results from IUPred (PMID:15955779), another predictor of disordered protein
   regions. Protein segments with an IUPred score above 0.5 considered to be
   disordered.

>  SLiMs are typically only functional when found in intrinsically disordered
>  regions. Any motif occurrence detected by the ELM prediction pipeline that
>  falls within disordered regions are more likely to be functional.

step 9. The 5th row contains information on secondary structure. The secondary
   structure is predicted using a pipeline mapping motif occurrence onto high
   quality reference domain structures (PMID:19852836). Check the graphical
   representation, if the output of the secondary structure filter and the
   disorder predictors agree with respect to wihch parts of the sequence are
   considered structured and which disordered.

step 10. The remainder of the figure (below “secondary structure” output)
   displays predicted and annotated motif instances, overlayed by the
   structural context from rows 2 and 3 (SMART domains and GlobPlot). A blue
   square indicates a single motif occurence, intensity of the color indicates
   the conservation of this sequence in homologous proteins. Boxes in gray are
   motif occurences which have been filtered out by the "structure filter".
   Boxes that are blue & gray are neutral (eg. residing in structural context,
   but the secondary structure detected a loop region). If the sequence is
   already present in the ELM database, any motif instances that have already
   been annotated are shown as ovals. Lastly, any motifs detected, which are
   annotated to be functional in homologous sequences, are shown as red/blue
   rectangles.

TODO: EXPLAIN / SHOW ANNOTATED INSTANCES

> In the case that not enough homologous sequences were detected to build an
> alignment, no conservation score can be calculated. Therefore all of the
> motif occurences will be shown in a uniform shade of blue.

step 11. Place the cursor over the blue box for motif occurence
   "MOD_PLK" at position 6-12. This motif is in a disordered region,
   and has not been filtered out by the structural filter. However, its
   conservation score is very low: 0.16, indicating it is not conserved
   in homologous proteins.

> The confidence score is based on how conserved the sequence is across a set
> of homolous proteins from other sequences. An full description of the method
> can be found in PMID:18460207.

step 12. Mouse over a gray rectangle (indicating motifs which have been
   filtered out) to find out why this hit was filtered out. It shows scores for
   all of the individual criteria used by the secondary structure filter: The name
   of the domain, the *accessibility score* , *secondary structure score*,
   *combined total score*, and the associated *total score P-value*
   (PMID:19852836).

![](Figures/BACT_1/elm_results_alignments_filtering_domains.png)
**Figure BACT-BP-3:** This section of the results contains additional details
of alignment of homologous proteins, filtering results and globular domains.

TODO: INSERT/CHANGE FIGURE/NAME

step 13. Scroll down to below the results graphic to find additional
   information on the ELM Predction pipeline's results (figure BACT-BP-3).
   The first section contains links to download or view the multiple sequence
   alignments of homologous proteins used to calculate the conservation score.
   Click on the link "Click here to enable the multiple sequence alignment
   viewer" to open the alignment in Jalview (note: this requires the Java browser
   plugin, which might not be available on some browsers).
   Alternatively you can also download the "alignment", "conservation features"
   and "phosphosite features" files separately to view on a desktop
   (non-browser) installation of Jalview (PMID:19151095).

> The search for possible homologs is performed against the UniRef90
> database, a dataset of protein sequences with less than 90 percent identity
> between any two of them (PMID:17379688). It is also possible that
> the BLAST results are not finished when the results page is shown: We
> suggest to refresh the page if you see the message "Either not enough data
> available to calculate a sequence alignment or the calculations haven't
> finished yet". In some cases it is also possible that no homologs will be
> detected. If you have refreshed the page after waiting for more than 3
> minutes, this is most likely the case.

TODO: CREATE FIGURE “FILTERING SUMMARY” FOR TP53

step 14. Scroll down to the section titled "Filtering Summary" to
   view some statistics about how many motifs and instances were filtered out
   (figure TP53-BP1-2). The first two lines contain information on whether and
   which filters were applied in step XXX of this protocol. The next two lines
   (SMART & Structural score) show how many motifs and instances were removed
   by the SMART and Secondary structure filters. The "Retained by" section
   shows how many motif hits were not filtered out by the "Smart" or
   "Structural Score" filter. In this example a total of XXX instances (of XXX
   different motifs were identified), of which XXX instances (and XXX motifs)
   were filtered out as they occured in a SMART domain.

> Note that the graphical summary above does not contain sequences filtered
> out by the "cell compartment" and "taxonomic context" filters (in step XXX).
> However those filtered out by the SMART and Structural scores are shown in the
> graphic above (as gray rectangles). If any "cell compartment" or "taxonomic
> context" filters are selected in step XXX, the number of motifs and instances
> are also shown in this table.

![](Figures/TP53_1/elm_results_known.png)
**Figure TP53-BP1-3**

Step 15. On the results page, scroll down to the heading: "The ELMs in the
following table are known instances annotated from the literature" (Fig TP53-BP1-3).
This table has details of SLiMs which have been manually annotated in the ELM
database. The columns show each motif name, the sequence(s) that matched the
motif as well as their starting and ending positions and the logic of the annotation
followed by a short description of each motif, to which cell compartments its
has been associated, and finally the regular expression of the motif.

> The "Logic" column indicates whether this motif is an example of a functional
> (True Positive, TP) or non-functional (False Positive, FP) motif. A TP
> instance is an instance annotated with experimental evidence showing this
> instance to be functional, whereas a FP is an instance with experimental
> evidence hinting at a function, but after careful inspection our annotators
> believe this instance to be non-functional. There are only rare cases of a
> true negative (TN) instance, which is an annotated instance where experiments
> have shown it to be non-functional.


TODO: INSERT/CHANGE FIGURE/NAME
step 16. Scroll down to the section with the header "Globular domains/ TM
   domains and signal peptide detected by the SMART server" (Figure BACT-BP-3).
   This section contains information on which domains were detected by the
   SMART server, and their positions. Clicking on their names will bring you to
   the SMART entry for that domain on the SMART homepage.

TODO: INSERT/CHANGE FIGURE/NAME
![](Figures/BACT_1/elm_results_motifs.png)
**Figure BACT-BP-7:** This table contains the list of motifs detected in the
sequence (only the top part of the table is shown).

TODO: INSERT/CHANGE FIGURE/NAME
step 17. Scroll further down to the section title "Results of ELM motif
   search after globular domain filtering, structural filtering and context
   filtering" to obtain an overview of all of the motifs and motif instances
   detected (Figure BACT-BP-7). Each row also contains information on the Motif
   name, the matching peptide sequence and its position. Additional information
   is shown about the ELM, cell compartment and its regular expression. If the
   motif was detected in a homologue, the column called "PHI-Blast Instance
   mapping" contains links to the Sequence alignment of the homologous protein,
   and a summary of the ELM instance mapper output. If a motif instance has
   been filtered out due to Structural criteria (SMART or Structure), this
   column contains a link to a page with details on how individual criteria
   that make up this filter. The last column contains information on the
   Probability filter: the probability reflects the chance to observe this
   motif in any random amino acid sequence.

TODO: INSERT/CHANGE FIGURE/NAME
![](Figures/BACT_1/elm_results_motifs_filtered.png)
**Figure BACT-BP-8:** This table contains the list of motifs detected in the
sequence (only the top part of the table is shown) which were excluded due to
structural filters.

TODO: INSERT/CHANGE FIGURE/NAME
step 18. Scroll further down to the heading "List of excluded ELMs falling inside
   SMART/PFAM domains and/or scoring poorly with the structural filter (if
   applicable)." (Figure BACT-BP-8). This table is (almost) identical to the
   one above, but shows motif instances which were rejected by the Structural
   filter or SMART filter.

Commit message:

MINOR: clarify phospho.elm and add empty line before figures

4-P53_basic_protocol_2.md, after:

# Basic Protocol 2: Predicting ELMs in sequences

One of the most useful (and used) features in ELM is the ability to detect
motifs in proteins and sequences. Given a protein's amino acid sequence, the
"EML Predictions" pipeline searches for occurrences of each motif class using
regular expressions, apply a set of filters to help judging results, and to
visualize resulting set of putative motifs.

In this protocol we will be viewing the manually annotated data of a typical
protein, using p53 (Uniprot ID: P53_HUMAN/P04637) as an example. We will cover
how to find the manually annotated motifs and instances, and how to find the
motif instances, the references used to annotate each instance, the
experimental protocols used, and additional information including relationships
to biological pathways (such as KEGG PMID:26476454), diseases (from OMIM
PMID:17357067) and molecular switches (in switches.ELM PMID:23550212).

## Necessary Resources

### Software & Hardware

A modern browser such as Firefox, Chrome, or Safari.
ELM is best viewed on a laptop or desktop computer, although tablets and
smartphones will also work.

## Predicting ELM instances using data from ELM database

![](Figures/TP53_1/elm_search.png)
**Figure TP53-BP1-1** The query input page for ELM for predicting motifs in a given protein sequence.

Step 1. Open a browser, and navigate to the ELM homepage: http://elm.eu.org.
Enter the Uniprot ID "P53_HUMAN" in the search field labelled "Enter a uniprot
identifier or accession number". The page should autocomplete/suggest the
protein "P53_HUMAN / P04637 (Homo sapiens)". Click on this entry to confirm
that we want to search for SLiM data for this protein. Click on "Submit" to
view the motif instance data for p53. (Fig. TP53-BP1-1)

> The autocompletion mechanism queries uniprot.org for protein identifier; if
> it succeeds, then additional information from uniprot will be used to
> pre-populate the filter boxes. In this example, P53_HUMAN is recognized as a
> Human protein, and so "Homo sapiens" is automatically filled in the
> "Taxonomic Context" field. Also, P53 has been annotated (by Uniprot) to be
> localized to nucleus, cytosol, endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondrion, so
> these are also automatically applied as search criteria. The motif cutoff of
> "100" is a sufficiently high (lenient) threshold to allow all other detected
> motifs to be shown.

step 3. Select the search criteria (optional). It is possible to limit the
   results by "cell compartment", "taxonomic context" or by changing the "motif
   probability cutoff". To restrict the search to include SLiM's that are
   active in certain cellular compartments, select one or more from the list
   (use the "control" key to select more than one option). It is also possible
   to select a "taxonomic context" to restrict the search to SLiMs from certain
   species. Start typing a species name in the "taxonomic context" input field to
   get an auto-completed list of species to select from.
   Additionaly, a "Motif probability cutoff" can be used to only retain ELM
   classes whose pattern probability is below the given value.
   For the current protocol, leave all of these at their default values: "not
   specified", "100" and no "taxonomic context"

TODO: Repeat search using stringent filters (homo sapiens, nucleus, 0.01)

## Interpreting the prediction results: Graphical Summary

step 4. Click "submit" to start the searching for motifs. 
   You will be brought to an intermediate page indicating that your results are
   being processed, and you should be redirected to the final results page within
   a minute.

> The Results are summarized in the first figure on the results page (see
> figure TP53-BP1-2). The graphical summary shows the results generated by the
> ELM prediction pipeline, combined with additional filters and information
> from external resources. The visualization should help you interpreting the
> results and to assess whether or not a motif is present in a sequence, as
> well as how likely it is to be functional based on its structural context and
> evolutionary conservation. Motif instances which are manually annotated in
> the database appear as red (TP) or yellow (FP) ovals in the graphic.
> Blue/gray squares represent predicted motif occurrences.
>
> You can bookmark this page: The results are stored for a week.

![](Figures/TP53_1/elm_results_summary.png)
TODO: INSERT/CHANGE FIGURE/NAME

**Figure TP53-BP1-2** The graphical results summary of the ELM Prediction
pipeline for “P53_HUMAN”. Note that not all motif detections are shown (the
image is truncated at the bottom). The top five rows show a set of structural
features. Annotated and predicted motifs are shown as differently colored
ovals/boxes.


step 6. The first row contains phosphorylation sites as retrieved from
   Phospho.ELM (PMID:21062810), and whether the phosphorylated amino acid is a
   serine, threonine or tyrosine. Phospho.ELM is a database of manually annotated
   phosphorylation sites obtained from scientific publications from low and
   high-throughput experiments. You can follow the link to Phospho.ELM by clicking
   on the phosphorylation site in the image to get more information on individual
   phosphorylation sites.

> Phosphorylation sites are only available when the search is performed with a
> protein accession (eg. *not* with FASTA sequence alone) in step XXX and there is 
> relevant information annotated in the Phospho.ELM database.
> Phosphorylation sites are relevant to interpret ELM motif predictions when
> the predicted motif requires to be phosphorylated (as in several docking and
> ligand binding motifs) and naturally, for the prediction of phosphorylation
> motifs.

step 7. The second row shows SMART and Pfam domains detected by the SMART
   database (PMID:9600884,PMID:25300481, PMID:9600884). Hover the mouse over
   these domains to see their names and exact start and end positions.

> In order to be functional SLiMs need to be accessble, and therefore they are
> usually not found within globular domains and structured regions
> (PMID:21909575). Any SLiMs detected by the ELM prediction pipeline are less
> likely to be functional, and are indicated with a red background (see also the "structural filter" described in step XXX).

step 8.  The third row shows globular and disordered regions in the sequence as
   predicted by GlobPlot (PMID:12824398). The fourth and fifth row contains
   results from IUPred (PMID:15955779), another predictor of disordered protein
   regions. Protein segments with an IUPred score above 0.5 considered to be
   disordered.

>  SLiMs are typically only functional when found in intrinsically disordered
>  regions. Any motif occurrence detected by the ELM prediction pipeline that
>  falls within disordered regions are more likely to be functional.

step 9. The 5th row contains information on secondary structure. The secondary
   structure is predicted using a pipeline mapping motif occurrence onto high
   quality reference domain structures (PMID:19852836). Check the graphical
   representation, if the output of the secondary structure filter and the
   disorder predictors agree with respect to wihch parts of the sequence are
   considered structured and which disordered.

step 10. The remainder of the figure (below “secondary structure” output)
   displays predicted and annotated motif instances, overlayed by the
   structural context from rows 2 and 3 (SMART domains and GlobPlot). A blue
   square indicates a single motif occurence, intensity of the color indicates
   the conservation of this sequence in homologous proteins. Boxes in gray are
   motif occurences which have been filtered out by the "structure filter".
   Boxes that are blue & gray are neutral (eg. residing in structural context,
   but the secondary structure detected a loop region). If the sequence is
   already present in the ELM database, any motif instances that have already
   been annotated are shown as ovals. Lastly, any motifs detected, which are
   annotated to be functional in homologous sequences, are shown as red/blue
   rectangles.

TODO: EXPLAIN / SHOW ANNOTATED INSTANCES

> In the case that not enough homologous sequences were detected to build an
> alignment, no conservation score can be calculated. Therefore all of the
> motif occurences will be shown in a uniform shade of blue.

step 11. Place the cursor over the blue box for motif occurence
   "MOD_PLK" at position 6-12. This motif is in a disordered region,
   and has not been filtered out by the structural filter. However, its
   conservation score is very low: 0.16, indicating it is not conserved
   in homologous proteins.

> The confidence score is based on how conserved the sequence is across a set
> of homolous proteins from other sequences. An full description of the method
> can be found in PMID:18460207.

step 12. Mouse over a gray rectangle (indicating motifs which have been
   filtered out) to find out why this hit was filtered out. It shows scores for
   all of the individual criteria used by the secondary structure filter: The name
   of the domain, the *accessibility score* , *secondary structure score*,
   *combined total score*, and the associated *total score P-value*
   (PMID:19852836).

![](Figures/BACT_1/elm_results_alignments_filtering_domains.png)
**Figure BACT-BP-3:** This section of the results contains additional details
of alignment of homologous proteins, filtering results and globular domains.

TODO: INSERT/CHANGE FIGURE/NAME

step 13. Scroll down to below the results graphic to find additional
   information on the ELM Predction pipeline's results (figure BACT-BP-3).
   The first section contains links to download or view the multiple sequence
   alignments of homologous proteins used to calculate the conservation score.
   Click on the link "Click here to enable the multiple sequence alignment
   viewer" to open the alignment in Jalview (note: this requires the Java browser
   plugin, which might not be available on some browsers).
   Alternatively you can also download the "alignment", "conservation features"
   and "phosphosite features" files separately to view on a desktop
   (non-browser) installation of Jalview (PMID:19151095).

> The search for possible homologs is performed against the UniRef90
> database, a dataset of protein sequences with less than 90 percent identity
> between any two of them (PMID:17379688). It is also possible that
> the BLAST results are not finished when the results page is shown: We
> suggest to refresh the page if you see the message "Either not enough data
> available to calculate a sequence alignment or the calculations haven't
> finished yet". In some cases it is also possible that no homologs will be
> detected. If you have refreshed the page after waiting for more than 3
> minutes, this is most likely the case.

TODO: CREATE FIGURE “FILTERING SUMMARY” FOR TP53

step 14. Scroll down to the section titled "Filtering Summary" to
   view some statistics about how many motifs and instances were filtered out
   (figure TP53-BP1-2). The first two lines contain information on whether and
   which filters were applied in step XXX of this protocol. The next two lines
   (SMART & Structural score) show how many motifs and instances were removed
   by the SMART and Secondary structure filters. The "Retained by" section
   shows how many motif hits were not filtered out by the "Smart" or
   "Structural Score" filter. In this example a total of XXX instances (of XXX
   different motifs were identified), of which XXX instances (and XXX motifs)
   were filtered out as they occured in a SMART domain.

> Note that the graphical summary above does not contain sequences filtered
> out by the "cell compartment" and "taxonomic context" filters (in step XXX).
> However those filtered out by the SMART and Structural scores are shown in the
> graphic above (as gray rectangles). If any "cell compartment" or "taxonomic
> context" filters are selected in step XXX, the number of motifs and instances
> are also shown in this table.

![](Figures/TP53_1/elm_results_known.png)
**Figure TP53-BP1-3**

Step 15. On the results page, scroll down to the heading: "The ELMs in the
following table are known instances annotated from the literature" (Fig TP53-BP1-3).
This table has details of SLiMs which have been manually annotated in the ELM
database. The columns show each motif name, the sequence(s) that matched the
motif as well as their starting and ending positions and the logic of the annotation
followed by a short description of each motif, to which cell compartments its
has been associated, and finally the regular expression of the motif.

> The "Logic" column indicates whether this motif is an example of a functional
> (True Positive, TP) or non-functional (False Positive, FP) motif. A TP
> instance is an instance annotated with experimental evidence showing this
> instance to be functional, whereas a FP is an instance with experimental
> evidence hinting at a function, but after careful inspection our annotators
> believe this instance to be non-functional. There are only rare cases of a
> true negative (TN) instance, which is an annotated instance where experiments
> have shown it to be non-functional.


TODO: INSERT/CHANGE FIGURE/NAME

step 16. Scroll down to the section with the header "Globular domains/ TM
   domains and signal peptide detected by the SMART server" (Figure BACT-BP-3).
   This section contains information on which domains were detected by the
   SMART server, and their positions. Clicking on their names will bring you to
   the SMART entry for that domain on the SMART homepage.

TODO: INSERT/CHANGE FIGURE/NAME

![](Figures/BACT_1/elm_results_motifs.png)
**Figure BACT-BP-7:** This table contains the list of motifs detected in the
sequence (only the top part of the table is shown).

TODO: INSERT/CHANGE FIGURE/NAME

step 17. Scroll further down to the section title "Results of ELM motif
   search after globular domain filtering, structural filtering and context
   filtering" to obtain an overview of all of the motifs and motif instances
   detected (Figure BACT-BP-7). Each row also contains information on the Motif
   name, the matching peptide sequence and its position. Additional information
   is shown about the ELM, cell compartment and its regular expression. If the
   motif was detected in a homologue, the column called "PHI-Blast Instance
   mapping" contains links to the Sequence alignment of the homologous protein,
   and a summary of the ELM instance mapper output. If a motif instance has
   been filtered out due to Structural criteria (SMART or Structure), this
   column contains a link to a page with details on how individual criteria
   that make up this filter. The last column contains information on the
   Probability filter: the probability reflects the chance to observe this
   motif in any random amino acid sequence.

TODO: INSERT/CHANGE FIGURE/NAME

![](Figures/BACT_1/elm_results_motifs_filtered.png)
**Figure BACT-BP-8:** This table contains the list of motifs detected in the
sequence (only the top part of the table is shown) which were excluded due to
structural filters.

TODO: INSERT/CHANGE FIGURE/NAME

step 18. Scroll further down to the heading "List of excluded ELMs falling inside
   SMART/PFAM domains and/or scoring poorly with the structural filter (if
   applicable)." (Figure BACT-BP-8). This table is (almost) identical to the
   one above, but shows motif instances which were rejected by the Structural
   filter or SMART filter.
