6-BACT_alternate_protocol_2.md, before:

# Alternate Protocol 2: Searching the ELM database using REST API


## Necessary Resources

### Software

Ideally use `curl` https://curl.haxx.se/ on the commandline.
However, any browser can be used to access the server, most browsers however download text- and csv-files instead of displaying them. Therefore, for trying out different URLs / Parameters, it might be better to use a commandline client such as `curl`.

## Downloading all ELM classes

![](Figures/BACT_2/elm_downloads_html.png)

**Figure ELM-Downloads:** The ELM downloads page, which holds information about
the different types of data (such as "Classes", "Instances", etc; see menu to
the right) that can be obtained from the server. The orange boxes are clickable
links, the URL following them are used to highlight the URL scheme used by the
server (bold font denotes specifics used in the examples such as query terms,
or formats).

step 1. Direct your browser to the URL 'http://elm.eu.org/downloads' or choose 'ELM Downloads' from the Menu at 'http://elm.eu.org' (see the [/Figures/elm_downloads_html.png](screenshot) figure showing the ELM downloads website).

> This webpage contains links and descriptions on how to download ELM data in text format.
> The information is separated in individual tables, eg. for 'Classes', 'Instances', and so on...
> Note that each table also shows the 'last modified date' indicating when the particular data was last updated.
> This is useful if you regularly want to update your local data with ELM data, as you can quickly check whether you actually _need_ to download the files again...
> Note the orange colored download links highlighting different formats:
> For many pages, which exist in html format (ending in '.html'), there also exists an additional URL/file extension to get the data in other formats.

step 2. Click on the first orange 'html' link in the table "Classes" or use the following URL: 'http://elm.eu.org/elms.html'

> This webpage shows all annotated ELM classes.
> Next, we are going to use the query parameter 'q' to limit our search

step 3. Use the following URL: 'http://elm.eu.org/elms.html?q=CSK'

> This will again show the webpage with all annotated ELM classes, this time however limited to those matching the query term 'PCSK'.
> Next, we are going to use the same URL pattern, but with '.tsv' to download the same data as actual data, not HTML.

![](Figures/BACT_2/elm_curl_classes_CSK.png)
**Figure ELM-Curl-Classes**:
Screenshot of a terminal window using `curl` to download all ELM classes matching the term 'CSK'.

step 4. Use the following URL: 'http://elm.eu.org/elms.tsv?q=CSK'

> By exchanging the '.html' part of the url with '.tsv', we ask the webserver to give us the data in TSV (tab-separated) format.
> This query should download a file such as the following:
```
> curl 'http://elm.eu.org/elms.tsv?q=CSK'
#ELM_Classes_Download_Version: 1.4
#ELM_Classes_Download_Date: 2016-11-06 17:39:41.503341
#Origin: elm.eu.org
#Type: tsv
#Num_Classes: 7
"Accession"	"ELMIdentifier"	"FunctionalSiteName"	"Description"	"Regex"	"Probability"	"#Instances"	"#Instances_in_PDB"
"ELME000101"	"CLV_PCSK_FUR_1"	"PCSK cleavage site"	"Furin (PACE) cleavage site (R-X-[RK]-R-|-X)."	"R.[RK]R."	"0.000508722921034"	"13"	"0"
"ELME000108"	"CLV_PCSK_KEX2_1"	"PCSK cleavage site"	"Yeast kexin 2 cleavage site (K-R-|-X or R-R-|-X)."	"[KR]R."	"0.007973463544"	"1"	"0"
"ELME000100"	"CLV_PCSK_PC1ET2_1"	"PCSK cleavage site"	"NEC1/NEC2 cleavage site (K-R-|-X)."	"KR."	"0.00390276834"	"6"	"0"
"ELME000103"	"CLV_PCSK_PC7_1"	"PCSK cleavage site"	"Proprotein convertase 7 (PC7, PCSK7) cleavage site (R-X-X-X-[RK]-R-|-X)."	"R...[KR]R."	"0.000508722921034"	"1"	"0"
"ELME000146"	"CLV_PCSK_SKI1_1"	"PCSK cleavage site"	"Subtilisin/kexin isozyme-1 (SKI1) cleavage site ([RK]-X-[hydrophobic]-[LTKF]-|-X)."	"[RK].[AILMFV][LTKF]."	"0.00682052736444"	"2""0"
"ELME000424"	"LIG_CSK_EPIYA_1"	"EPIYA ligand motif for CSK-SH2"	"Csk Src Homology 2 (SH2) domain binding EPIYA motif"	"EP[IL]Y[TAG]"	"2.46761307667e-06"	"13"	"0"
"ELME000013"	"MOD_TYR_CSK"	"TYR phosphorylation site"	"Members of the non-receptor tyrosine kinase Csk family phosphorylate the C-terminal tyrosine residues of the Src family."	"[TAD][EA].Q(Y)[QE].[GQA][PEDLS]"	"2.92617843803e-07"	"12"	"0"
```


![](Figures/BACT_2/elm_curl_instances_p53_human.png)
**Figure ELM-Curl-Instances-P53**:
Screenshot of a terminal window using `curl` to download all ELM instances annotated for sequence p53_human.


step 4. Use the following URL: 'http://elm.eu.org/instances.gff?q=p53_human'

```
> curl 'http://elm.eu.org/instances.gff?q=p53_human'
##gff-version 3
P04637	ELM	sequence_feature	19	26	.	.	.	ID=DEG_MDM2_SWIB_1
P04637	ELM	sequence_feature	381	385	.	.	.	ID=DOC_CYCLIN_1
P04637	ELM	sequence_feature	359	363	.	.	.	ID=DOC_USP7_MATH_1
P04637	ELM	sequence_feature	364	368	.	.	.	ID=DOC_USP7_MATH_1
P04637	ELM	sequence_feature	30	35	.	.	.	ID=DOC_WW_Pin1_4
P04637	ELM	sequence_feature	78	83	.	.	.	ID=DOC_WW_Pin1_4
P04637	ELM	sequence_feature	312	317	.	.	.	ID=DOC_WW_Pin1_4
P04637	ELM	sequence_feature	15	21	.	.	.	ID=MOD_CK1_1
P04637	ELM	sequence_feature	30	37	.	.	.	ID=MOD_GSK3_1
P04637	ELM	sequence_feature	12	18	.	.	.	ID=MOD_PIKK_1
P04637	ELM	sequence_feature	385	388	.	.	.	ID=MOD_SUMO_for_1
P04637	ELM	sequence_feature	339	352	.	.	.	ID=TRG_NES_CRM1_1
P04637	ELM	sequence_feature	305	323	.	.	.	ID=TRG_NLS_Bipartite_1
##FASTA
>P04637
MEEPQSDPSVEPPLSQETFSDLWKLLPENNVLSPLPSQAMDDLMLSPDDIEQWFTEDPGPDEAPRMPEAAPPVAPAPAAPTPAAPAPAPSWPLSSSVPSQKTYQGSYGFRLGFLHSGTAKSVTCTYSPALNKMFCQLAKTCPVQLWVDSTPPPGTRVRAMAIYKQSQHMTEVVRRCPHHERCSDSDGLAPPQHLIRVEGNLRVEYLDDRNTFRHSVVVPYEPPEVGSDCTTIHYNYMCNSSCMGGMNRRPILTIITLEDSSGNLLGRNSFEVRVCACPGRDRRTEEENLRKKGEPHHELPPGSTKRALPNNTSSSPQPKKKPLDGEYFTLQIRGRERFEMFRELNEALELKDAQAGKEPGGS
```

step 5. Use the following URL: 'http://elm.eu.org/instances.tsv?q=CLV_&taxon=aedes+agypti'

> Use the query term 'q=CLV_' to get all instances of cleavage site classes.
> To limit your search to 'yellow fever mosquito' instances, use the parameter 'taxon=' followed by the taxon's scientific name, replacing spaces with '+':

```
> curl 'http://elm.eu.org/instances.tsv?q=CLV_&taxon=aedes+agypti'
```

More data (interactions, domains, methods, etc.) can be downloaded from ELM in
analogous fashion. Different formats are available depending on data type (the most
common format is TSV), for example ELM instances can be downloaded in TSV, FASTA, GFF, PIR,
or PSI-MI format (either XML or MiTab) [24067240].

% NOTE: TODO: Mention ELM software license agreement?

Commit message:

add paragraph about REST, cite fielding

6-BACT_alternate_protocol_2.md, after:

# Alternate Protocol 2: Searching the ELM database using REST API

Many researchers are interested in large-scale analyses rather than information
about individual protein sequences. To this end, individual queries to the ELM
webserver with a single protein id at a time, are not practical.

For this reason, as much information as possible is made available via a REST
interface (\cite{Fielding_2002}). This allows the user to interact with the
database and webserver via scriptable URL requests. Each request can easily be
tested in the browser before it is being automated in a script.


## Necessary Resources

### Software

Ideally use `curl` https://curl.haxx.se/ on the commandline.
However, any browser can be used to access the server, most browsers however download text- and csv-files instead of displaying them. Therefore, for trying out different URLs / Parameters, it might be better to use a commandline client such as `curl`.

## Downloading all ELM classes

![](Figures/BACT_2/elm_downloads_html.png)

**Figure ELM-Downloads:** The ELM downloads page, which holds information about
the different types of data (such as "Classes", "Instances", etc; see menu to
the right) that can be obtained from the server. The orange boxes are clickable
links, the URL following them are used to highlight the URL scheme used by the
server (bold font denotes specifics used in the examples such as query terms,
or formats).

step 1. Direct your browser to the URL 'http://elm.eu.org/downloads' or choose 'ELM Downloads' from the Menu at 'http://elm.eu.org' (see the [/Figures/elm_downloads_html.png](screenshot) figure showing the ELM downloads website).

> This webpage contains links and descriptions on how to download ELM data in text format.
> The information is separated in individual tables, eg. for 'Classes', 'Instances', and so on...
> Note that each table also shows the 'last modified date' indicating when the particular data was last updated.
> This is useful if you regularly want to update your local data with ELM data, as you can quickly check whether you actually _need_ to download the files again...
> Note the orange colored download links highlighting different formats:
> For many pages, which exist in html format (ending in '.html'), there also exists an additional URL/file extension to get the data in other formats.

step 2. Click on the first orange 'html' link in the table "Classes" or use the following URL: 'http://elm.eu.org/elms.html'

> This webpage shows all annotated ELM classes.
> Next, we are going to use the query parameter 'q' to limit our search

step 3. Use the following URL: 'http://elm.eu.org/elms.html?q=CSK'

> This will again show the webpage with all annotated ELM classes, this time however limited to those matching the query term 'PCSK'.
> Next, we are going to use the same URL pattern, but with '.tsv' to download the same data as actual data, not HTML.

![](Figures/BACT_2/elm_curl_classes_CSK.png)
**Figure ELM-Curl-Classes**:
Screenshot of a terminal window using `curl` to download all ELM classes matching the term 'CSK'.

step 4. Use the following URL: 'http://elm.eu.org/elms.tsv?q=CSK'

> By exchanging the '.html' part of the url with '.tsv', we ask the webserver to give us the data in TSV (tab-separated) format.
> This query should download a file such as the following:
```
> curl 'http://elm.eu.org/elms.tsv?q=CSK'
#ELM_Classes_Download_Version: 1.4
#ELM_Classes_Download_Date: 2016-11-06 17:39:41.503341
#Origin: elm.eu.org
#Type: tsv
#Num_Classes: 7
"Accession"	"ELMIdentifier"	"FunctionalSiteName"	"Description"	"Regex"	"Probability"	"#Instances"	"#Instances_in_PDB"
"ELME000101"	"CLV_PCSK_FUR_1"	"PCSK cleavage site"	"Furin (PACE) cleavage site (R-X-[RK]-R-|-X)."	"R.[RK]R."	"0.000508722921034"	"13"	"0"
"ELME000108"	"CLV_PCSK_KEX2_1"	"PCSK cleavage site"	"Yeast kexin 2 cleavage site (K-R-|-X or R-R-|-X)."	"[KR]R."	"0.007973463544"	"1"	"0"
"ELME000100"	"CLV_PCSK_PC1ET2_1"	"PCSK cleavage site"	"NEC1/NEC2 cleavage site (K-R-|-X)."	"KR."	"0.00390276834"	"6"	"0"
"ELME000103"	"CLV_PCSK_PC7_1"	"PCSK cleavage site"	"Proprotein convertase 7 (PC7, PCSK7) cleavage site (R-X-X-X-[RK]-R-|-X)."	"R...[KR]R."	"0.000508722921034"	"1"	"0"
"ELME000146"	"CLV_PCSK_SKI1_1"	"PCSK cleavage site"	"Subtilisin/kexin isozyme-1 (SKI1) cleavage site ([RK]-X-[hydrophobic]-[LTKF]-|-X)."	"[RK].[AILMFV][LTKF]."	"0.00682052736444"	"2""0"
"ELME000424"	"LIG_CSK_EPIYA_1"	"EPIYA ligand motif for CSK-SH2"	"Csk Src Homology 2 (SH2) domain binding EPIYA motif"	"EP[IL]Y[TAG]"	"2.46761307667e-06"	"13"	"0"
"ELME000013"	"MOD_TYR_CSK"	"TYR phosphorylation site"	"Members of the non-receptor tyrosine kinase Csk family phosphorylate the C-terminal tyrosine residues of the Src family."	"[TAD][EA].Q(Y)[QE].[GQA][PEDLS]"	"2.92617843803e-07"	"12"	"0"
```


![](Figures/BACT_2/elm_curl_instances_p53_human.png)
**Figure ELM-Curl-Instances-P53**:
Screenshot of a terminal window using `curl` to download all ELM instances annotated for sequence p53_human.


step 4. Use the following URL: 'http://elm.eu.org/instances.gff?q=p53_human'

```
> curl 'http://elm.eu.org/instances.gff?q=p53_human'
##gff-version 3
P04637	ELM	sequence_feature	19	26	.	.	.	ID=DEG_MDM2_SWIB_1
P04637	ELM	sequence_feature	381	385	.	.	.	ID=DOC_CYCLIN_1
P04637	ELM	sequence_feature	359	363	.	.	.	ID=DOC_USP7_MATH_1
P04637	ELM	sequence_feature	364	368	.	.	.	ID=DOC_USP7_MATH_1
P04637	ELM	sequence_feature	30	35	.	.	.	ID=DOC_WW_Pin1_4
P04637	ELM	sequence_feature	78	83	.	.	.	ID=DOC_WW_Pin1_4
P04637	ELM	sequence_feature	312	317	.	.	.	ID=DOC_WW_Pin1_4
P04637	ELM	sequence_feature	15	21	.	.	.	ID=MOD_CK1_1
P04637	ELM	sequence_feature	30	37	.	.	.	ID=MOD_GSK3_1
P04637	ELM	sequence_feature	12	18	.	.	.	ID=MOD_PIKK_1
P04637	ELM	sequence_feature	385	388	.	.	.	ID=MOD_SUMO_for_1
P04637	ELM	sequence_feature	339	352	.	.	.	ID=TRG_NES_CRM1_1
P04637	ELM	sequence_feature	305	323	.	.	.	ID=TRG_NLS_Bipartite_1
##FASTA
>P04637
MEEPQSDPSVEPPLSQETFSDLWKLLPENNVLSPLPSQAMDDLMLSPDDIEQWFTEDPGPDEAPRMPEAAPPVAPAPAAPTPAAPAPAPSWPLSSSVPSQKTYQGSYGFRLGFLHSGTAKSVTCTYSPALNKMFCQLAKTCPVQLWVDSTPPPGTRVRAMAIYKQSQHMTEVVRRCPHHERCSDSDGLAPPQHLIRVEGNLRVEYLDDRNTFRHSVVVPYEPPEVGSDCTTIHYNYMCNSSCMGGMNRRPILTIITLEDSSGNLLGRNSFEVRVCACPGRDRRTEEENLRKKGEPHHELPPGSTKRALPNNTSSSPQPKKKPLDGEYFTLQIRGRERFEMFRELNEALELKDAQAGKEPGGS
```

step 5. Use the following URL: 'http://elm.eu.org/instances.tsv?q=CLV_&taxon=aedes+agypti'

> Use the query term 'q=CLV_' to get all instances of cleavage site classes.
> To limit your search to 'yellow fever mosquito' instances, use the parameter 'taxon=' followed by the taxon's scientific name, replacing spaces with '+':

```
> curl 'http://elm.eu.org/instances.tsv?q=CLV_&taxon=aedes+agypti'
```

More data (interactions, domains, methods, etc.) can be downloaded from ELM in
analogous fashion. Different formats are available depending on data type (the most
common format is TSV), for example ELM instances can be downloaded in TSV, FASTA, GFF, PIR,
or PSI-MI format (either XML or MiTab) [24067240].

% NOTE: TODO: Mention ELM software license agreement?
